### The US Senate Filibuster - Nov 13, 2024

The US, in part, got to where it is today due to the Senate filibuster, and the future of the filibuster might be a sign of where the US could be heading.

The US Senate has a lot of significant functions, including passing bills into law (along with the House of Representatives), and confirming Cabinet and Supreme Court appointments proposed by the President.  The Senate is made up of 100 members, and to pass something or confirm someone at least 51 members need to vote for it.  However, before they can vote on passing something or confirming someone, the Senate needs to debate the issue and then have a special vote to say that debate is finished and they are ready for the proper vote.  This special vote needs 60 members to vote for it, which means that a minority of the Senate (41 people or more) can stop debate from ever finishing and prevent a vote from ever happening.  This stalling tactic is known as the “filibuster”.

The US has a pretty rigid two-party system, so almost every Senator is either a Democrat or a Republican and they generally vote as teams and they generally oppose each other.  It is rare for either party to have 60 members in the Senate, which means that it is almost always the case that a bill or confirmation can be filibustered.  When laws and confirmations don’t go through - when the work of the Senate is basically held up indefinitely - this is known as “deadlock” or “gridlock”.  The US Senate is in an almost permanent state of deadlock.

When the law-making branch stops making law, like when the Senate is deadlocked, the law-making tends to migrate elsewhere.  In the US there are two places it can go: to the President, who makes law-like executive orders, and to the Supreme Court, who set law-like precedents for significant cases.  This is why desegregation, marriage equality and abortion rights all happened in the US Supreme Court rather than the Senate and House of Reps.

The result is that the Supreme Court is supremely politicised: the ideological leanings of Supreme Court Justices are well-known and getting people on the Supreme Court is perhaps one of the major ambitions of modern US political parties.  Because of the deadlock in the Senate, this is where the action happens.  This is why Republicans held up a Democratic Supreme Court appointment for almost a year (citing that it was an “election year”) but rushed through a Republican Supreme Court appointment in record time even though it was an election year.  The Republicans also removed the filibuster for Supreme Court appointments when there was a Republican President (Trump), though it (currently) remains for Cabinet appointments and ordinary legislation.

The filibuster has been a relatively anti-democratic procedure - stalling work in the law-making branch and politicising the Supreme Court.  So why has it remained?  Neither party has been eager to remove it because it means that they hold some sway over which bills pass even if they don’t do well in an election and form a minority.
But the time for the filibuster might be up.  It has disappeared for Supreme Court nominations, and Trump has asked the Republican Senate leaders to allow his Cabinet appointments without any debate or vote whatsoever, skipping the entire Senate process (called a “recess appointment”).  This would leave the filibuster just for ordinary legislation.

I think the filibuster has been a bit of a curse for the US political system - but now I think it is going to be a canary.  Will the new Republican-majority Senate keep the filibuster, stalling their chances at legislative progress and leaving power with the Supreme Court and the President?  It’s quite likely, especially because the Supreme Court has also ruled that Presidents are largely immune from prosecution.  But if the Republicans get rid of the filibuster, to me it suggests one thing: they are not worried about being a minority in the future.  And that could mean confidence of electoral success, but it could mean something else.  Putting conventions aside to delay some Supreme Court picks and rush others, skipping the Senate confirmation process for Cabinet picks, and Presidential immunity are all suggestive of a system that is abandoning democracy and consolidating power around a single group who won’t let it go, and the death of the filibuster, as problematic as it has been, would be a clear sign that they are confident they can hold on indefinitely.